Academic Coverage
=================

Monday 6th October (Week 2)
---------------------------

We talked about [*Navier Stokes
equations*](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Navier%E2%80%93Stokes_equations)
and how they are a mathematical abstraction of the world around us. We
talked about how such differential equations cannot necessarily be
solved in practice, and therefore we need to form numerical solutions.
We mentioned that the Met office solves these equations on 1km^2^ sized
grids across UK for weather prediction. We discussed a little what
uncertainty meant in this context, and how modelling could have a
deterministic part and a stochastic part.

Triggered by talking about what had come up in the first week of
lectures, we discussed the relationship between Computer Science and
Maths. In absolute terms we talked about how many of the challenges of
Computer Science are how to *implement* maths on a Computer (e.g. the
Turing test, the way a processor works). But for Mathematics,
particularly pure mathematics, there is a lot of interest in
*separating* the maths from the implementation. Mathematics can stand
alone, outside implementation, emerging purely through abstract thought.
We looked at the wikipedia page for [*Principia
Mathematica*](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Principia_Mathematica) and
talked a little about set theory with a focus on [*Godel's
incompleteness
theorem*](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/G%C3%B6del%27s_incompleteness_theorems)
and the [*barber paradox*](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Barber_paradox).

In the end we talked about the Spell Correction challenge for internet
companies make spell corrections? We speculated it was on the basis of
past data and probability may be used to rank the suggestions. We
thought that it might be a good idea to look at
[**n**](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/N-gram)[*-gram
models*](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/N-gram) to understand this better.
We are hoping for Daniel Bernhardt to visit us (from Facebook’s London
office) to give a talk on this material.

Monday 13th October (Week 3)
----------------------------

No meeting this week due to lack of room availability (sorry, I need to
get more organised on the rooms).

In your own time, I’d like you to have a look at a mathematician called
[*John Baez*](http://math.ucr.edu/home/baez/). He is a Mathematical
Physicist at University of California, Riverside. He’s got interests in
network theory, information geometry and more recently the climate. He
posts regular interesting articles. Here’s a few posts that I find
particularly interesting.

We will look at Google+ and check how to follow his Please can I suggest
the following actions? Follow[ *John Baez’s Google+
feed*](https://plus.google.com/117663015413546257905).

On 2nd Law of Thermodynamics

[*https://plus.google.com/117663015413546257905/posts/2gFT3cM8scm*](https://plus.google.com/117663015413546257905/posts/2gFT3cM8scm)

On Logic and Real and Complex Numbers\
[*https://plus.google.com/117663015413546257905/posts/JHAku2S1KFw*](https://plus.google.com/117663015413546257905/posts/JHAku2S1KFw)

On Machine Learning (which is what I do)

[*https://plus.google.com/117663015413546257905/posts/dZcXuyHj7LH*](https://plus.google.com/117663015413546257905/posts/dZcXuyHj7LH)

On Hyperreal Numbers and infinitesimals

[*https://plus.google.com/117663015413546257905/posts/14b9fdM62un*](https://plus.google.com/117663015413546257905/posts/14b9fdM62un)

Please have a read around all his threads and find the idea or concept
you’d like to discuss the most! Then we’ll have a session on that.

Also: **Non Academic Task 1 (see below)**

Monday 20th October (Week 4)
----------------------------

Discussion of [*n-grams*](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/N-gram) and how
to model language, and starting thinking more about the spell checking
problem that Daniel will talk about. We’ll have a simple review of
probability and how to relate marginals and conditional probabilities
and think about how probability can be used to represent sequences. In
particular you should refresh yourself on the sum rule of probability
and the product rule of probability.

We spoke about how to create a joint distribution of probability given a
conditional and a good question was asked. Given the model of a sequence
for a triplet, how do we predict the probability of the *middle* word.
We answered using the sum rule and the product rule.

**Plagiarism: Non-Academic Task 2**

We covered plagiarism by starting a conversation on licensing of code in
computer science. How the open source licenses work and the importance
of open source software (BSD Unix and Linux) in modern operating
systems. This led on to general ideas of giving credit for work, arising
from the introduction of copyright law, and how we need to give credit
in academic work.

In two weeks time our meeting will focus on the John Baez special
topics. Everyone should select a topic to present. You can also work in
pairs to discuss and present your topic. We will present special topics
starting in Week 6.

Monday 27th October (Week 5)
----------------------------

No meeting. I’m away in Italy.

Monday 3rd November (Week 6)
----------------------------

John Baez topics Week 1

Thomas presented on the Quantum Thriller:
[*https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I7oZAo8hJnU*](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I7oZAo8hJnU)
which led us on to Quantum cryptography. Interesting reading is:

[*http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A\_Universe\_from\_Nothing*](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_Universe_from_Nothing)

[*http://simonsingh.net/books/the-code-book/*](http://simonsingh.net/books/the-code-book/)

Presentation in pairs or individuals of topics from John Baez’s Google+
feed Week 1.

Monday 10th November (Week 7)
-----------------------------

Presentation in pairs or individuals of topics from John Baez’s Google+
feed Week 2.

Group discussion, lead by Matheus and Islam, about Science, Models and
Machine Learning

*http://johncarlosbaez.wordpress.com/2014/09/03/science-models-and-machine-learning/*

Some of the topics mentioned during the discussion were:

Software available:

*http://scikit-learn.org/stable/*

*https://github.com/SheffieldML/GPy*

*http://www.automaticstatistician.com*

Decision making and rational behaviour:
*http://www.ted.com/talks/dan\_ariely\_asks\_are\_we\_in\_control\_of\_our\_own\_decisions\#t-890383*

The sampling theory (statistical sampling):

*http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7nr9rQpm2A4*

Also: **Non Academic Task 3 (see below)**

Monday 17th November (Week 8)
-----------------------------

Preparation for Daniel’s visit! Let’s go through those rules of
probability once again, and have quick refresher on n-gram models. We
should also try and look at dynamic programming algorithms for trying to
find the most probable path through a sequence.

Monday 24th November (Week 9)
-----------------------------

Daniel is visiting from Facebook London where he’s been working for just
over a year. Before that he worked for 4 years at Microsoft Search, and
previous to that he did his PhD in applied machine learning for
emotional gesture recognition and his Undergraduate in Computer Science
(both at the University of Cambridge).

Daniel Bernhardt visit. We will learn about how Facebook deal with the
challenge of spell correction for the vast range of names that exist.
Daniel will give us a talk followed by a Q&A about anything you care to
have answered!

Daniel spoke about the spell checking problem, two different types of
spelling errors cognitive errors and typo errors, and how these are
passed into the search engine. Search engine queries take several
hundred milliseconds. Your typed query is passed to the search engine
after spell checking.

“A System for searching the social Graph” (VLDB 2013)

### First Approach

We talked about the [*edit
distance*](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edit_distance) as a way of
comparing correct names (in a dictionary) to incorrect names. This is a
dynamic programming approach for computing the distance of the query
from a ‘correct’ query.

Through a [*hash table*](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hash_table) you
can compute look ups quickly.

In practice the dictionary could be really massive! 1 billion user
nodes, 240 billion photo nodes, 1.2 trillion posts, 1 trillion edges.

To build a dictionary of unique names: there are 73 million unique first
name and 67 million unique surnames. 560,800,810 unique en-us names! The
dictionary would be very large and nearly 40% of US full names are
unique!

Context also needs to be included, you are often spelling friends names,
you don’t want the average of all names!

Edit distances also don’t encode properly mistakes that are more likely
(for example due to a keyboard layout).

### Actual Approach

Language model takes any given sequence and gives a probability
associated. n-gram models can be used for modelling language.

We talked about error models and how they can be derived from query
rewrites. This is when a user types a search and then doesn’t seem to
select any of the returned results. They then change the query and that
new query gives the right result. This gives a lot of valuable
information about what the original query should have been.

Other Non Academic Material

We are using these sessions for academic style tutorials about computer
science and maths. However, the University also requires us to look at
some specific material in these sessions.

We talked about challenges including doing different languages, and
making general solutions. In particular we talked about the challenge of
*domain adaptation* and how a spell checker for one particular domain
may not be appropriate for another domain. We talked about the
importance of data and feedback.

Daniel talked about how widely machine learning is used across the site,
and how, often, it’s not the learning algorithm itself that’s a problem,
but evaluating the quality of the model or extracting the data for
learning.

Charles asked about when the system is finished, Daniel said broadly
speaking that they are always looking for continuous improvement. Whilst
the target is to focus on impact, they don’t consider a system done, but
if the system is working well, then they may reprioritise on something
else.

Your Personal Tutor
===================

I am also your personal tutor, that means if you are having problems
with the course, life, the universe or anything, I’m your main contact.
Feel free to catch me after our meetings if you’d like to arrange an
appointment, or drop me an email. Unfortunately, I do get a lot of email
and I do sometimes miss things. So if you don’t get a reply, feel free
to pester me again. If something particularly serious happens and you
need to inform us you can also make contact with Zoe Fletcher, who is
our administrator for Computer Science in charge of all things teaching.
She’s really great, and knows all the program rules. Or Amanda Sharkey
(1st year tutor for Computer Science).

Late in the first semester we will try and organise times for individual
meetings.

Non Academic Tasks
==================

I want these meetings to be about the academic side of life, they are
not assessed, but it is a chance for us to all talk about interesting
things in maths and computer science. However, the powers that be also
dictate that we have to cover various other non-academic material. This
includes:

Non-Academic 1
--------------

The [*Sheffield graduate development
program*](http://www.sheffield.ac.uk/sgdp/index)) is about how you
should be developing your CV alongside your academic work. You should
create a new version of your CV and think about how it will read to
prospective employers or companies where you might want to do an
internship. (Semester 1, week 3)

Non-Academic 2
--------------

Read through the[ *Computer Science First Year’s Tutorial
Booklet*](http://www.dcs.shef.ac.uk/intranet/teaching/public/tutorials/level1/firstyeartutorials.pdf)
on *unfair means and plagiarism*. You need to fill in the form provided
and prepare to submit your answers to MOLE2. (Semester 1, week 4).

Non-Academic 3
--------------

Read through the[ *Computer Science First Year’s Tutorial
Booklet*](http://www.dcs.shef.ac.uk/intranet/teaching/public/tutorials/level1/firstyeartutorials.pdf)
on *assignments and feedback*. Think about the different forms of
assessment you receive. How do DCS and SoMaS differ in their ways of
providing you feedback? (Semester 1, week 7)

Non-Academic 4
--------------

Read through the[ *Computer Science First Year’s Tutorial
Booklet*](http://www.dcs.shef.ac.uk/intranet/teaching/public/tutorials/level1/firstyeartutorials.pdf)
on *exam skills*. Read old exam papers and think about what the
question’s aims are. How to DCS and SoMaS differ in their exam question
style? How are they similar?
